rfcs: added leader epoch related rfc (#3777)
redpanda-data/redpanda: docs/rfcs/20220209_leader_epoch_support_rfc.md

- Feature Name: Leader epoch handling in redpanda
- Status: in-progress
- Start Date: 2022-02-09
- Authors: Michal Maslanka
- Issue: https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/issues/3689

# Executive Summary

> In kafka some of the client Requests are fenced with the Leader Epoch. 
> Leader Epoch is a 32-bit integer that is increased every time partition 
> leadership changes. The Leader Epoch is used to detect stale metadata, 
> fence produce and fetch request and recognize truncations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Kafka, some of the client requests are fenced with the leader epoch. 
The leader epoch is a 32-bit integer that is increased every time the partition 
leadership changes. The leader epoch is used to detect stale metadata, 
fence produce and fetch requests, and recognize truncations.
```

## What is being proposed

> Using Raft protocol `term` as a Kafka leader epoch. The `term` is semantically 

Reviewer 2: curious to see how kraft is thinking about this.

Author: Exactly the same, in raft implementation they do not even use the word `term`

> Using Raft protocol `term` as a Kafka leader epoch. The `term` is semantically 
> identical to Kafka's leader epoch as it is increased every time Raft group 
> leadership changes and stays constant when leader is active.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposal is to use the Raft protocol `term` as a Kafka leader epoch. The `term` is semantically 
identical to Kafka's leader epoch as it is increased every time the Raft group 
leadership changes and it stays constant when leader is active.
```

> ## Why (short reason)

Reviewer 2: good idea.

> Leader epoch is used by Kafka clients to detect truncations and stale metadata. 
> In Redpanda we were missing that mechanism. This may lead to some issues that 
> may occur when one of the nodes is isolated and do not receive metadata updates. 
> Returning leader epoch will allow the client to identify this situation 
> and update metadata against different broker. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The leader epoch is used by Kafka clients to detect truncations and stale metadata. 
In Redpanda we are missing that mechanism. This may lead to some issues that 
can occur when one of the nodes is isolated and does not receive metadata updates. 
Returning the leader epoch will allow the client to identify this situation 
and update metadata against a different broker. 
```

## How (short plan)

> We will expose raft group terms, that are already gathered in redpanda metadata 

Reviewer 2: I assume this will be translated to a `namespace kafka` type. Note that this proposal should note wrap around as an explicit non-goal.

> We will expose raft group terms, that are already gathered in redpanda metadata 
> infrastructure as leader epochs. Additionally we will implement 
> `OffsetForLeaderEpoch` Kafka API to provide full compatibility. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will expose Raft group terms that are already gathered in the Redpanda metadata 
infrastructure as leader epochs. Additionally, we will implement the 
`OffsetForLeaderEpoch` Kafka API to provide full compatibility. 
```

# Motivation
## Why are we doing this?

Adding leader epoch support will bring allow us to better handle stale metadata 
and unclean truncations.

### Note on unclean truncations in redpanda

> Since Redpanda replication is based on Raft we do not allow for unclean leader 

Reviewer 3: Would be good to define "unclean" here

Reviewer 2: good idea.

> Since Redpanda replication is based on Raft we do not allow for unclean leader 
> election that may lead to high watermark being decreased. The only situation in 
> which high watermark may be decreased is simultaneous failure of majority of 
> nodes handling relaxed consistency writes such as `ACKS=1` and `ACKS=0`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since Redpanda replication is based on Raft, we do not allow for unclean leader 
election that may lead to the high watermark being decreased. The only situation in 
which the high watermark may be decreased is simultaneous failure of the majority of 
nodes handling relaxed consistency writes such as `ACKS=1` and `ACKS=0`. 
```

> nodes handling relaxed consistency writes such as `ACKS=1` and `ACKS=0`. 

Reviewer 4: Also for cases when the # of replicas == 1 -- if something goes terribly wrong and data is lost, clients can detect this through the leader epoch.

Author: exactly

## What use cases does it support?

> We will add support for leader epoch in each request that requires it and is 
> currently handled by Redpanda.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will add support for a leader epoch in each request that requires it and is 
currently handled by Redpanda.
```

## What is the expected outcome?

> Validation of leader epoch that is consistent with Kafka.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The validation of a leader epoch that is consistent with Kafka.
```

# Guide-level explanation
## How do we teach this?

This is a standard feature of Kafka protocol, we may use existing, related KIPS.

- KIP-101 Alter Replication Protocol to use Leader Epoch rather than High Watermark for Truncation
- KIP-232 Detect outdated metadata using leaderEpoch and partitionEpoch
- KIP-320 Allow fetchers to detect and handle log truncation
- KIP-359 Verify leader epoch in produce requests

> - KIP-359 Verify leader epoch in produce requests

Reviewer 4: Duplicate line here, also note that KIP-359 actually isn't implemented yet.

# Reference-level explanation

## Detailed design - What needs to change to get there

### Leader epoch metadata

We need to store last stable leader term in `cluster::partition_leaders_table`.
The term will directly be mapped to leader epoch returned in `MetadataResponse`. 

We are going to introduce a type representing current leader and the term. 

```c++

>     struct leader_term {

Reviewer 2: is this how it is stored in kafka. if not i thought it was going to be a map of term -> epoch. why the 2 ints.

Author: we already store it this way, we just need to return this as a named tuple

        std::optional<model::node_id> leader;
        model::term_id term;
    };

```

### Offset for leader epoch API handler

The `OffsetForLeaderEpoch` API returns last offset in request leader epoch plus 
one. That is the first offset of next leader epoch or in other words an offset 
on which requested leader epoch ends.

The `OffsetForLeaderEpoch` is handled only by the requested partition leader. 
In order to implement that feature we need to add an API that will allow us to 
query for last offset in given term. Then the offset will have to be translated 
with an offset translator to obtain valid Kafka offset.

For local partitions this is an easy task since segment are stored in sorted 
collection. Each segment may contain only single term. 

For remote partitions (cloud storage) we are going to use 
information stored in partition manifests. Manifest contains both the segment 

> term together with offsets stored in a segment. Given that we do not allow two 

Reviewer 2: Is this true in compacted segments?

Author: yes, compacted segments end offset doesn't change, we are safe to use segment end offset as a source of offset for leader epoch.
